# Parallel Delphes

## Description

[Delphes](https://delphes.github.io/) is a well-known C++ framework for fast detector simulation (e.g. for high-energy particle physics). Unfortunately, it does not natively take advantage of multiple processor cores; the Delphes executable runs on a single thread. Furthermore, due to architectural limitations (e.g. global variables), it would be pretty hard to make it run in parallel.

Fortunately, there is one simple solution: _data sharding_. We split up an input HepMC file into multiple parts (smaller HepMC files, each containing an equally-sized subset of the original list of events), then run many Delphes processes in parallel (with the same configuration). The result is an overall speed-up of the detector simulation process.

## Benchmark results

I've done a few (superficial) benchmarks, but enough to gather reasonable evidence that this approach brings a performance benefit.

- Running a HepMC2 file with 5000 events, generated by Pythia 8, through Delphes:

  Original single-core version: 54 seconds

  > real 0m53.437s
  >
  > user 0m52.151s
  >
  > sys 0m0.864s

  Parallel: 15 seconds (**3.6x faster**)

  > real 0m14.237s
  >
  > user 1m35.992s
  >
  > sys 0m13.557s

- Running an end-to-end MadGraph script (subprocess generation, MadEvent, showering/hadronization through Pythia, detector simulation with Delphes) for 100.000 diquark scalar decay events:

  Original single-core version: 8 minutes 16 seconds

  Parallel version: 6 minutes 53 seconds (**1.2x faster**)

  Note that some of the other parts of the pipeline (such as running Pythia) were already run in parallel by MadGraph.

In both cases, parallel Delphes was configured to use **64 cores** (while the original Delphes was able to run on a single one).

## Installation instructions

This wrapper has been written in [Rust](https://rust-lang.org/). The easiest way to install and manage Rust is by using [rustup](https://rustup.rs/).

After installing the appropriate Rust toolchain for your platform, run

```shell
cargo build --release
```

to build the release (optimized) version of the binaries. This will provide you with a `target/release/DelphesHepMC2` executable, which you can place somewhere on your PATH.

Rename the original `DelphesHepMC2` binary to `DelphesHepMC2Original`, then set the following environment variables:

```shell
export DELPHES_HEPMC2_PATH=/path/to/your/DelphesHepMC2Original
export DELPHES_PARALLEL_NUM_SHARDS=<number of cores parallel Delphes should use>
```

Afterwards, you should be good to go. Just use the new `DelphesHepMC2` executable (the one provided by this repo) in place of the original one, and it will automatically parallelize its work by sharding the input data across multiple files.
